Explain data retention mechanisms (#1460)
alphagov/email-alert-api: docs/data-retention-mechanisms.md

# Data retention mechanisms

There are several mechanisms regarding the retention of data in EmailAlertApi.
This doc gives a brief overview of each.

## Deactivating subscribers

> We deactivate subscribers for a couple of different scenarios. One being where

Reviewer: We could also describe what "deactivation" actually means, and why we do it: this appears to be so the nullifying worker can do its thing.

> We deactivate subscribers for a couple of different scenarios. One being where

Author: We don't need this section anymore, yay! 🎉

the user unsubscribes via either following an unsubscribe link in the email
or via the manage subscriptions page.

Another way a user is deactivated is if their subscription is ended on our side
because the topic they're signed up for no longer exists. This happens via an
unpublished rabbitMQ message which is eventually handled by the
[UnpublishHandleService]. This is only applicable for subscriptions to the
topic taxonomy.

[UnpublishHandleService]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/master/app/services/unpublish_handler_service.rb

## Nullifying deactivated subscribers

We nullify the email addresses of subscribers after they've been deactivated

> for over 28 days. This means that the address field on the subscriber record is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for over 28 days, so that we're not storing their email address for longer than necessary.
```

I think it's worth briefly explaining why we do this. The second sentence appears to be a repeat of the first, so I've suggested we remove that too.

Author: Sure 👍

updated to nil once the threshold has been reached.

We use the [NullifyDeactivatedSubscribersWorker] to do this which runs [every
hour].

[every hour]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/master/config/sidekiq.yml#L26-L28
[NullifyDeactivatedSubscribersWorker]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/master/app/workers/nullify_deactivated_subscribers_worker.rb

## Archiving emails

> We archive emails to S3 using the [EmailArchiveWorker]. Emails are eligible for

Reviewer: We can mention that we do this to support longterm analytics, and link to the [doc with more info about it](https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/master/docs/analytics.md#analytics-through-athena).

archiving immediately after creation as long as they haven't already been
archived (based on `archived_at` value).

The [archive worker runs every hour].

[EmailArchiveWorker]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/master/app/workers/email_archive_worker.rb
[archive worker runs every hour]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/ec075c7198b965d3771726946dcd37783b9de9c5/config/sidekiq.yml#L29-L31

## Deleting emails

> We delete emails after they've been archived for a minimum of 7 days. Emails get

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We delete emails 7 days after they've been archived. Emails get
```

Minor: the "minimum" wording here sounded like there would be other days in the future where we might archive an email.

> archived immediately (as soon as they're generated) and then deleted using the

Reviewer: Minor: we could remove this sentence, as we've already talked about archiving in the previous section.

[EmailDeletionWorker].

> The [deletion worker runs every hour].

Reviewer: A future reader may be confused about why we have a specific worker for deleting emails, and why it runs hourly. Can we add more detail here?

Author: Sure, added more detail!

Reviewer: Thanks. I actually wonder if we could combine the `EmailDeletionWorker` and the `HistoricalDataDeletionWorker` together, if the latter runs more frequently. Is there a reason we can't do that?

That's what I think we should explain here. It may be there is no reason and it's purely historical. If so, we could say we're planning to combine them as part of removing the archiving feature (as an idea).

Author: Theres no reason why we can't combine the workers, technically speaking. However when the historic worker was created it was decided that the deletion of emails was solving a separate issue to what the historic worker was intended for, hence the different scheduled worker run times.

E.g: 

* Email deletion worker - to keep the db performant (as v large quantity of emails produced)

* Historical deletion worker - keeping the database tidy and manageable (not perpetually keeping unused data)

I think both workers responsibilities are now converging though so it may make sense to combine them. An example being is that we may have to start deleting digest_run_subscribers sooner and sooner as we produce more and more and at that point the historic worker will have v similar responsibilities to the email deletion worker.

I'll add a bit in to explain that's what we're planning to do when retiring archiving. I guess this means I'll have to update the ADR too.

Reviewer: Thanks @1pretz1, a caveat in this section sounds good. Once archiving is gone I agree it makes sense to look at combining them, as long as no one part of the deletion takes a long time (on its own).

I don't think you need to change the ADR: the policy is unchanged; we're just talking about the location of the code, which is always up for change in the future. ADRs don't need to be permanently accurate.

[deletion worker runs every hour]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/ec075c7198b965d3771726946dcd37783b9de9c5/config/sidekiq.yml#L32-L34
[EmailDeletionWorker]: https://github.com/alphagov/email-alert-api/blob/a62abc85453b723d683c2dc13f3bf0065fb86d5f/app/workers/email_deletion_worker.rb

## Deleting historic data

> We now delete data we deem as historic everday at [midday] using the

Reviewer: Minor: why midday?

Author: Why indeed, explanation added.

[HistoricalDataDeletionWorker].

> The data we delete is deemed historic if its now redundant and has no use

Reviewer: We can be clearer here: we're _asserting_ that data over a year old has no use in the system, or analytical purposes. I think it's also important to mention the motivations: it makes analytics harder; and some of it quickly fills the DB.

Author: I've added a bit more detail and the motivations which improves the section. 

I think we need to be careful though using 'over a year' as that implies an out and out rule but thats not the case for some cases.
